D2 Diagrams, Concepts Page, Better Index Page, Assessment Rearrangement (#11001)
PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn: docs/concepts/index.md

# Concepts

PrairieLearn is extremely flexible and powerful, but this flexibility can appear opaque at first. This document provides an overview of the key concepts in PrairieLearn, and how they fit together.

## High-level overview

> A [**course**](../course/index.md) in PrairieLearn is composed of **course instances** and **questions**. Each [course instance](../courseInstance.md) is an offering of a course in a particular semester/term. For example, a course "CS 225" might have instances "CS 225 Spring 2022" and "CS 225 Fall 2022".

Reviewer: Nit; we generally want the course instance name to not also include the course name.

```suggestion
A [**course**](../course/index.md) in PrairieLearn is composed of **course instances** and **questions**. Each [course instance](../courseInstance.md) is an offering of a course in a particular semester/term. For example, a course "CS 225" might have instances "Spring 2022" and "Fall 2022".
```

The course itself contains:

- A list of questions (i.e. a question bank)
- A list of course instances

Each course instance contains:

- All assessments for that term, for example, Homework 1, Homework 2, and Exam 1

Each assessment contains:

- A list of questions used in that assessment (taken from the course)

### Concept Map

<div style="max-width: 500px;" markdown>
![](./concept-map-example.d2){pad="0"}
</div>

### Questions

[**Questions**](../question.md) are all independent, and a given question can be used on many different assessments across many different course instances. They are written in HTML (as a [Mustache template](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html)) and use [elements](../elements.md) to accept student input. Python code can be used to generate random parameters and grade questions. Every time a question is shown to a student with randomly generated parameters, that is called a **variant** of the question.

> ![An example HW question](./hw-question.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![An example homework question](./hw-question.png)
```

        </pl-question-panel>

        <pl-number-input answers-name="y" label="$y =$"></pl-number-input>
        <pl-submission-panel> {{feedback.y}} </pl-submission-panel>
        ```

    === "Example `server.py`"

        ```python title="server.py"
        def generate(data):
            data["params"]["x"] = random.randint(5, 10)
            data["params"]["operation"] = random.choice(["double", "triple"])

            if data["params"]["operation"] == "double":
                data["correct_answers"]["y"] = 2 * data["params"]["x"]
            else:
                data["correct_answers"]["y"] = 3 * data["params"]["x"]

        def parse(data):
            if "y" not in data["format_errors"] and data["submitted_answers"]["y"] < 0:
                data["format_errors"]["y"] = "Negative numbers are not allowed"

        def grade(data):
            if math.isclose(data["score"], 0.0) and data["submitted_answers"]["y"] > data["params"]["x"]:
                data["partial_scores"]["y"]["score"] = 0.5
                data["score"] = 0.5
                data["feedback"]["y"] = "Your value for $y$ is larger than $x$, but incorrect."
        ```

#### External Graders

> For coding questions, you can use an [**external grader**](../externalGrading.md) to grade a submission instead of a `server.py` file. This lets you grade student-submitted code in a sandboxed environment. There are currently external graders for C, C++, Java, Python, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For coding questions, you can use an [**external grader**](../externalGrading.md) to grade a submission instead of a `server.py` file. This lets you grade student-submitted code in a sandboxed environment. There are currently external graders for C, C++, Java, Python, and more. You can also make a custom external grader for any language.
```

Reviewer 2: This is really nit, but: technically you could use external grader for non-coding questions. For example, I used an external grader in a question where students were expected to create a Git repository and save files in a particular format. The external grader ran a Python script with gitpython to navigate the created repository and check that all expected actions were performed (e.g., a branch was created, the new file in that branch was created, the file was added to the commit, no other files were changed, etc.). I believe we've also seen a recent case of an instructor on Slack using external graders to check datasets?

In essence, an external grader can be used in any situation where the grading process benefits from a controlled environment to be executed, and/or where grading may take more than a second to run. Coding questions are the most common case, but this could be used for other questions with complex grading (e.g., image processing, environments that require an API call, automated verification of datasets, etc.). I'm wondering if a quick mention of this flexibility may be a decent idea here? That said, this is nit, and I don't mind if you'd prefer not to waste time with these cases.

#### Workspaces

> Additionally, it may be useful for students to work in a consistent development [**workspace**](../workspaces/index.md) to reduce the likelihood of issues with their environment, and provide a code editor with syntax highlighting, autocompletion, and other features. Workspaces provide a seamless coding experience for students when used with an external autograder. Workspaces use [Docker](https://docker.com) to ensure a consistent environment, with premade workspace for popular languages (e.g. Python, C++). Workspaces based on custom Docker images are also supported.

Reviewer: Nits:

```suggestion
You can use [**workspaces**](../workspaces/index.md) to provide an in-browser development environment. Workspaces ensure all students are using a consistent environment and can provide a code editor with syntax highlighting, autocompletion, and other features. Workspaces provide a seamless coding experience for students when used with an external autograder. Workspaces use [Docker](https://docker.com) images to ensure a consistent environment, with premade workspace for popular languages (e.g. Python, C++). Workspaces based on custom Docker images are also supported.
```

> ![workspace screenshot](./workspace.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Screenshot of a JupyterLab workspace](./workspace.png)

```

Both of these features can be setup by modifying the `info.json` file for the question.

### Elements

> Questions can use [**elements**](../elements.md) to accept student input, display diagrams, control how questions are displayed. Elements are pre-built interface components for common questions types, including numerical inputs, multiple choice, and more. If you require more flexibility, [**custom elements**](../devElements.md) are reusable components that can be tailored to your course to create more complex questions.

Reviewer: Nits:

```suggestion
Questions can use [**elements**](../elements.md) to accept student input, display diagrams, control how questions are displayed, and more. You can use built-in elements for common questions types, including numerical inputs, multiple choice, and more. If you require more flexibility, you can create reusable [**custom elements**](../devElements.md) that can be tailored to your course to create more complex questions.
```

=== "Integer input element"

    ![Integer input element](../elements/pl-integer-input.png)

=== "HTML for element"

    ```html title="question.html"
    <pl-integer-input answers-name="int_value" label="$y =$"></pl-integer-input>
    ```

You can view a list of all the available elements in the [elements documentation](../elements.md).

### Assessments

> A course contains a collection of questions, which are composed together to create [**assessments**](../assessment/index.md). Each course instance contains a collection of **homework assessments** and **exam assessments**. Homeworks are formative assessments designed for mastery learning: they give unlimited retries with different variants, and incentivize repeated correct answers. Exams are summative assessments designed to measure learning: they give limited attempts with the same variant, and incentivize getting the correct answer on the first try.

Reviewer: Nit, is this any better?

```suggestion
A course's questions are composed together to create homework and exam [**assessments**](../assessment/index.md). Homeworks are formative assessments designed for mastery learning: they give unlimited retries with different variants, and incentivize repeated correct answers. Exams are summative assessments designed to measure learning: they give limited attempts with the same variant, and incentivize getting the correct answer on the first try.
```

Author: Hmm, this removes the point that assessments belong to a course instance

Reviewer: This?

```suggestion
A course's questions are composed together to create homework and exam [**assessments**](../assessment/index.md) in a course instance. Homeworks are formative assessments designed for mastery learning: they give unlimited retries with different variants, and incentivize repeated correct answers. Exams are summative assessments designed to measure learning: they give limited attempts with the same variant, and incentivize getting the correct answer on the first try.
```

![Homework Assessment](./hw-assessment.png)

Asssessments are organized into **assessment sets** based on the type of assessment (e.g. `Homework`, `Quiz`, `Exam`). Optionally, each assessment can be a part of a **module** (e.g. `Introduction`, `Review`, `Linked Lists`). Your assessments can then be shown to students grouped by module or by assessment set.

=== "Assessments (Set Grouping)"

    ![Assessments grouped by set](./set-grouping.png)

=== "Assessments (Module Grouping)"

    ![Assessments grouped by module](./module-grouping.png)

### JSON configuration files

Each item in PrairieLearn (questions, assessments, etc.) has associated metadata that describes the item. This metadata is stored in JSON files and describes the relationships between items, the item's properties, and other information. These metadata files are used to generate the user interface for editing and viewing the items, as well as the interface for students to complete them.

| Item            | Configuration file        |
| --------------- | ------------------------- |

> | Question        | `info.json`               |
> | Course          | `infoCourse.json`         |
> | Course Instance | `infoCourseInstance.json` |
> | Assessment      | `infoAssessment.json`     |

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
| Course          | `infoCourse.json`         |
| Course Instance | `infoCourseInstance.json` |
| Assessment      | `infoAssessment.json`     |
| Question        | `info.json`               |
```
